Trade and the Ancient Middle East

Trade was the cornerstone of the urban economy in the Middle East, as caravans negotiated the surrounding desert, restricted only by access to water and mountain ranges.

This has been the case since ancient times, partly due to the geology of the area, which consists mostly of limestone and sandstone, with few deposits of metallic ore and other useful materials.

Ancient demands for obsidian (a black volcanic rock used for making mirrors and tools) led to trade with Armenia to the north, while jade for cutting tools was brought from Turkistan, and the precious stone lapis lazuli was imported from Afghanistan.

Such expeditions can be traced back to ancient Sumeria, the earliest known Middle Eastern civilization.

Records show that merchant caravans and trading posts were established by the Sumerians in the surrounding mountains and deserts of Persia and Arabia, where they traded grain for raw materials such as timber and stones, as well as metals and gems.

Reliance on trade had several important consequences.

Production was generally in the hands of skilled individual artisans who worked under the guidance of a master, who was also the shop owner.

In these shops, differences of rank were blurred as artisans and masters worked together in the same modest establishment.

They were usually members of the same guild and religious sect, lived in the same neighborhoods, and often had assumed (or real) kinship relationships.

The worker was bound to the master by a mutual contract that either one could terminate, and the relationship was seen as a partnership.

This mode of craft production favored the growth of self-governing and ideologically egalitarian craft guilds throughout the Middle Eastern city.

These were essentially professional associations that provided mutual aid and protection to their members and maintained professional standards.

The growth of independent guilds was furthered by the fact that surplus was not a result of domestic craft production but primarily from international trade.

The government allowed working people to govern themselves, similar to how shepherds of tribal confederacies were left alone by their leaders.

In this laissez-faire environment, a multitude of small-scale local egalitarian or quasi-egalitarian organizations for fellowship, worship, and production flourished.

Individuals could interact with one another within a community of harmony and ideological equality, following their own popularly elected leaders and governing themselves through shared consensus while minimizing distinctions of wealth and power.

The mercantile economy was also characterized by a peculiar moral stance typical of people who live by trade-an attitude that is individualistic, calculating, risk-taking, and adaptive to circumstances.

Personal relationships and a careful assessment of character have always been crucial in a mercantile economy with little regulation, where one's word is one's bond and where informal ties of trust solidify an international trade network.

Merchants and artisans have never had much tolerance for aristocratic professions of moral superiority.

Instead, they favor an egalitarian ethic of the open market, where steady hard work, the loyalty of one's peers, and entrepreneurial skills make all the difference.

Similar to pastoralists, Middle Eastern merchants and artisans dissatisfied with their environment could simply relocate to more favorable conditions-an act of self-assertion that was largely impossible in most other civilizations throughout history.

Dependence on long-distance trade also meant that the great empires of the Middle East were built on unstable foundations, both literally and figuratively.

The central state, although often wealthy and populous, was inherently fragile, as the development of new international trade routes could undermine the monetary system and erode state power.

This occurred when European seafarers bypassed Middle Eastern merchants after Vasco da Gama's voyage around Africa in the late fifteenth century, which opened up a southern route.

The region's ecology also allowed armed predators to roam the surrounding barren lands, making it nearly impossible for a state to exert control.

Peripheral peoples, therefore, had a significant advantage in their dealings with the central authority, making government power insecure and apprehensive.

