The Commercialization of Pearl River Agriculture

The Pearl River Delta in southern China was a region abundant in agriculture.

It consisted of alluvial soils captured from the silt carried by major rivers.

These sand flats, known as such by the Chinese, were cultivated and refined to become highly productive rice paddies.

By the sixteenth century, they yielded two rice crops and one crop of vegetables and wheat annually.

Peasant farmers independently produced a significant portion of the family's food.

However, the region's agriculture went beyond subsistence farming, as many non-food cash crops were grown and traded in the numerous markets scattered throughout the countryside.

In addition to rice, peasant farmers in the Pearl River Delta cultivated sugarcane, hemp, cotton, and mulberries for silkworms, among other crops.

While commerce and market exchanges played a vital role in the rural economy until approximately 1550, it was not yet fully commercialized.

As the population grew from 1400 to 1550, the volume of crops sold and the number of rural markets increased, but at a rate proportional to the population growth.

The proportion of agricultural land dedicated to cash crops in 1550 was similar to that of 1400.

However, after 1550, the agricultural economy of the region experienced significant commercialization.

Markets and marketing activities expanded at a faster pace than the population.

The primary catalyst for this economic transformation was the new demand for Chinese goods, particularly silk and porcelain, from European traders who arrived in the South China Sea during the sixteenth century.

For the Pearl River region, trade was triangular and facilitated by the Portuguese.

Using their own funds or silver supplied by Japanese merchants, Portuguese traders sailed up the Pearl River to participate in biannual fairs in the city of Guangzhou.

There, they exchanged silver for export goods, which were then loaded onto ships bound for the Japanese city of Nagasaki.

Japanese merchants in Nagasaki paid for these Chinese goods with silver, initiating another round of trade.

Trade through Manila in the Philippines also brought silver into the South China economy.

Chinese merchants from Guangdong and Fujian provinces sailed to Manila with their goods, which the Spanish purchased with silver.

The silver then flowed back to China as Chinese commodities made their way to Europe.

By 1600, this trade resulted in an annual inflow of approximately 200,000 kilograms of silver into the coastal economies of south and southeast China.

In the Pearl River Delta, the silk industry flourished due to the combination of sand-flat fields, fish ponds, and fruit trees.

In the fifteenth century, peasant farmers in the region began replacing some of their sand-flat rice fields with fish ponds, likely in response to increased demand from Guangzhou.

Along the embankments, peasant farmers during the early Ming Dynasty (1368-1644) primarily planted fruit trees, giving rise to the combination of fruit trees and fishponds.

The carp in the ponds fed on organic matter that fell or was discarded into the water, while the mud scooped from the ponds fertilized the fruit trees and rice fields, and also strengthened the embankments, providing more protection for the fishponds.

The fruit tree and fishpond culture provided a solid foundation for the expansion of the silk industry.

As the demand for silk grew, peasant farmers replaced fruit trees with mulberry trees (silkworms feed on mulberry leaves) and further converted rice paddies to accommodate this system.

For example, by 1581 in the Longshan area of Shunde county, fishponds accounted for eighteen percent of the productive land, and when combined with mulberry trees on the embankments, they covered approximately thirty percent of the cultivated land area.

