Infantile Amnesia

What do you remember about your life before you were three?

Few people can recall anything that happened to them in their early years.

Adults' memories of the following years are also typically limited.

Most individuals only remember a few significant and distinctive events, such as hospitalization or the birth of a sibling.

How can we explain this inability to recall early experiences?

The mere passage of time does not account for it;

adults can recognize pictures of people they went to high school with, even after 35 years.

Another seemingly plausible explanation-that infants do not form lasting memories at this stage of development-is also incorrect.

Children aged two and a half to three years old remember experiences that occurred in their first year, and eleven-month-olds remember some events a year later.

The hypothesis that infantile amnesia reflects the repression of sexually charged episodes also fails to explain the phenomenon.

While such repression may occur, people cannot remember ordinary events from the infant and toddler periods either.

Three other explanations appear more promising.

One involves physiological changes relevant to memory.

The maturation of the frontal lobes of the brain continues throughout early childhood, and this part of the brain may be critical for remembering specific episodes that can be retrieved later.

Demonstrations of infants' and toddlers' long-term memory have involved their repetition of motor activities they had previously seen or done, such as reaching in the dark for objects, putting a bottle in a doll's mouth, or pulling apart two pieces of a toy.

The brain's level of physiological maturation may support these types of memories, but not those requiring explicit verbal descriptions.

A second explanation involves the influence of the social world on children's language use.

Hearing and telling stories about events may help children store information in ways that will endure into later childhood and adulthood.

By hearing stories with a clear beginning, middle, and end, children may learn to extract the essence of events in ways that they can describe many years later.

Consistent with this view, parents and children increasingly engage in discussions of past events when children are about three years old.

However, hearing such stories is not sufficient for younger children to form lasting memories.

Telling such stories to two-year-olds does not seem to produce long-lasting verbalizable memories.

A third likely explanation for infantile amnesia involves incompatibilities between the ways in which infants encode information and the ways in which older children and adults retrieve it.

Whether people can remember an event depends critically on the match between how they encoded the information earlier and how they attempt to retrieve it later.

The better individuals can reconstruct the perspective from which the material was encoded, the more likely recall will be successful.

This view is supported by various factors that can create mismatches between very young children's encoding and older children's and adults' retrieval efforts.

The world appears very different to a person whose head is only two or three feet above the ground compared to someone whose head is five or six feet above it.

Older children and adults often try to recall the names of things they saw, but infants would not have encoded the information verbally.

General knowledge of event categories, such as a birthday party or a visit to the doctor's office, helps older individuals encode their experiences.

However, infants and toddlers are unlikely to encode many experiences within such knowledge structures.

These three explanations of infantile amnesia are not mutually exclusive;

in fact, they support each other.

Physiological immaturity may be a factor in why infants and toddlers do not form extremely lasting memories, even when they hear stories that promote such remembering in preschoolers.

Hearing the stories may lead preschoolers to encode aspects of events that allow them to form memories accessible in adulthood.

Conversely, improved encoding of what they hear may help them better understand and remember stories, thus making the stories more useful for remembering future events.

Therefore, all three explanations-physiological maturation, hearing and producing stories about past events, and improved encoding of key aspects of events-seem likely to be involved in overcoming infantile amnesia.

