Westward Migration

The story of the westward movement of population in the United States is primarily the story of the expansion of American agriculture-the development of new areas for livestock raising and the cultivation of wheat, corn, tobacco, and cotton.

After 1815, improved transportation enabled more and more western farmers to escape a self-sufficient way of life and enter a national market economy.

During periods of high commodity prices, the rate of westward migration increased dramatically.

Old America seemed to be breaking up and moving westward, observed an English visitor in 1817 during the first great wave of migration.

Emigration to the West reached its peak in the 1830s.

In 1810, only one-seventh of the American people lived west of the Appalachian Mountains, but by 1840, more than a third lived there.

Why were these hundreds of thousands of settlers-most of them farmers, some of them artisans-drawn away from the cleared fields and established cities and villages of the East?

Certain characteristics of American society help explain this remarkable migration.

The European ancestors of some Americans had lived rooted to the same village or piece of land for centuries until religious, political, or economic crises uprooted them and drove them across the Atlantic.

Many of those who experienced this abrupt change lacked the ties that had bound them and their ancestors to a single place.

Moreover, European society was relatively stratified, with occupation and social status being inherited.

In American society, however, the class structure was less rigid, allowing for easier occupational mobility and a belief that it was one's duty to improve their social and economic position.

As a result, many Americans were inherently restless, rootless, and ambitious.

These social traits helped produce the nomadic and daring settlers who kept pushing westward beyond the fringes of settlement.

Additionally, there were other immigrants who migrated west in search of new homes, material success, and better lives.

The West had plenty of attractions: the fertile river bottoms, the productive soils of the rolling forest lands, and the rich loams of the prairies were enticing to New England farmers working their rocky, infertile land and to southeastern farmers plagued with soil depletion and erosion.

In 1820, under a new land law, a farm could be bought for $100.

The proliferation of banks made it easier for those without cash to negotiate loans in paper money.

Western farmers borrowed with the confident expectation that the expanding economy would keep farm prices high, thus making it easy to repay loans when they fell due.

Transportation was becoming less of a problem for those who wished to move west and for those who had farm surpluses to send to market.

Prior to 1815, western farmers who did not live on navigable waterways were connected to them only by dirt roads and mountain trails.

Livestock could be driven across the mountains, but the cost of transporting bulky grains in this fashion was several times greater than their value in eastern markets.

The first step toward improving western transportation was the construction of turnpikes.

These roads made it possible to reduce transportation costs and thus stimulated the commercialization of agriculture along their routes.

Two other developments signaled the end of the era of turnpikes and initiated a transportation revolution that resulted in increased regional specialization and the growth of a national market economy.

First came the steamboat;

although flatboats and keelboats remained important until the 1850s, steamboats eventually surpassed all other craft in carrying passengers and freight.

Steamboats were not only faster but also transported upriver freight for about one-tenth of the cost compared to hand-propelled keelboats.

Next came the Erie Canal, an enormous project spanning about 350 miles.

1After the canal went into operation, the cost per mile of transporting a ton of freight from Buffalo to New York City declined from nearly 20 cents to less than 1 cent. Eventually, the western states redirected much of their produce from the rivers to the Erie Canal, a shorter route to eastern markets.

