Transition to Sound in Film

The transition from silent to sound film at the end of the 1920s marks the most significant transformation in motion picture history.

Despite the numerous technological advancements in theatrical and home delivery of moving images that have occurred since then, no single innovation has been regarded as a similar kind of watershed.

In almost every language, the most basic division in cinema history lies between silent films and films with sound.

However, this fundamental standard of historical periodization hides a host of paradoxes.

Almost every movie theater, regardless of its size, had a piano or organ to provide musical accompaniment to silent pictures.

In many cases, spectators in the era before recorded sound experienced elaborate auditory presentations alongside the visual images of movies.

For example, in Japan, benshi (narrators) crafted multivoiced dialogue narratives, while in Europe and the United States, symphony-size orchestras performed original musical compositions.

In Berlin, for the premiere performance of The Battleship Potemkin outside the Soviet Union, film director Sergei Eisenstein collaborated with Austrian composer Edmund Meisel (1874-1930) on a musical score that matched the sound to the image.

The Berlin screenings with live music contributed to the film's wide international fame.

Moreover, the triumph of recorded sound has overshadowed the diverse technological and aesthetic experiments with the visual image that were taking place simultaneously in the 1920s.

New color processes, larger or differently shaped screen sizes, multiple-screen projections, and even television were among the developments invented or tried out during this period, sometimes with remarkable success.

However, the high costs of converting to sound and the early limitations of sound technology suppressed innovations and hindered progress in these other areas.

The introduction of new screen formats was delayed for twenty-five years, and color, although used for special productions over the next two decades, did not become the norm until the 1950s.

Although it may be challenging to imagine from a later perspective, some critics in the 1920s predicted that sound film would be a technical novelty that would soon fade from sight, just like many previous attempts dating back to before the First World War to synchronize images with recorded sound.

These critics made a common assumption that the technological inadequacies of earlier efforts, such as poor synchronization, weak sound amplification, and fragile sound recordings, would inevitably reoccur.

While their evaluation of the technical flaws in 1920s sound experiments was not entirely incorrect, they failed to consider important new forces in the motion picture industry that would not accept failure.

These forces were the rapidly expanding electronics and telecommunications companies that were developing and connecting telephone and wireless technologies in the 1920s.

In the United States, these companies included American Telephone and Telegraph, General Electric, and Westinghouse.

They were interested in all forms of sound technology and the potential revenues for commercial exploitation.

Their competition and collaboration led to the creation of the broadcasting industry in the United States, starting with the introduction of commercial radio programming in the early 1920s.

With significantly greater financial resources than the motion picture industry and a broader vision of the relationships between entertainment and communications media, they revitalized research into recording sound for motion pictures.

By 1929, the United States motion picture industry released over 300 sound films, although this figure includes silent films with music tracks or films prepared in dual versions to accommodate cinemas that were not yet wired for sound.

At the production level, the conversion to sound was virtually complete in the United States by 1930.

In Europe, the transition took a little longer, mainly because smaller producers found the costs of sound prohibitive.

In other parts of the world, problems with rights or access to equipment further delayed the shift to sound production for a few more years, although cinemas in major cities may have been wired to play foreign sound films.

The triumph of sound cinema was rapid, complete, and immensely popular.

