Seventeenth-Century Dutch Agriculture

Agriculture and fishing formed the primary sector of the economy in the Netherlands in the seventeenth century.

Dutch agriculture was modernized and commercialized.

New crops and agricultural techniques raised levels of production to meet market demands, and cheap grain was imported annually from the Baltic region in large quantities.

According to estimates, about 120,000 tons of imported grain fed approximately 600,000 people, which accounted for about a third of the Dutch population.

Importing the grain, which would have been expensive and time-consuming for the Dutch to produce themselves, kept the price of grain low and stimulated individual demand for other foodstuffs and consumer goods.

Apart from this, being able to give up labor-intensive grain production freed both the land and the workforce for more productive agricultural divisions.

The peasants specialized in livestock husbandry, dairy farming, and cultivating industrial crops and fodder crops.

They grew flax, madder, rape, tobacco, hops, and turnips.

These products were mostly bought by urban businesses.

There was also a demand among urban consumers for dairy products such as butter and cheese, which had become more expensive than grain in the sixteenth century.

The high prices encouraged the peasants to improve their animal husbandry techniques.

For example, they began feeding their animals indoors to increase the milk yield of their cows.

In addition to dairy farming and cultivating industrial crops, horticulture emerged as a third sector of the Dutch economy, reflecting the modernization of agriculture.

In the sixteenth century, fruit and vegetables were only found in gardens belonging to wealthy people.

This changed in the early part of the seventeenth century when horticulture became accepted as an agricultural sector.

Whole villages began to cultivate fruit and vegetables, which were then transported by water to markets in the cities.

The consumption of fruit and vegetables was no longer restricted to the wealthy.

As the demand for agricultural produce from both consumers and industry increased, agricultural land became more valuable.

People tried to work the available land more intensively and reclaim more land from wetlands and lakes.

To increase production on existing land, the peasants made more use of crop rotation and began regularly applying animal waste to the soil, rather than relying solely on grazing livestock for fertilization.

Industrial waste, such as ash from soap-boilers, was collected in the cities and sold in the country as artificial fertilizer for the first time.

The increased yield and price of land justified reclaiming and draining even more land.

The Dutch battle against the sea is legendary.

Noorderkwartier in Holland, with its numerous lakes and stretches of water, was particularly suitable for land reclamation.

One of the biggest projects undertaken there was the draining of the Beemster lake, which began in 1608.

The richest merchants in Amsterdam contributed money to reclaim a good 7,100 hectares of land.

Forty-three windmills powered the drainage pumps, enabling the leasing of the reclamation to farmers as early as 1612.

The investors received annual leasing payments at an interest rate of 17 percent.

Land reclamation continued, and between 1590 and 1665, almost 100,000 hectares were reclaimed from the wetland areas of Holland, Zeeland, and Friesland.

However, land reclamation significantly decreased after the middle of the seventeenth century because the price of agricultural products began to fall, making it less profitable in the second part of the century.

Dutch agriculture was eventually affected by the general agricultural crisis in Europe during the last two decades of the seventeenth century.

However, what is astonishing about this is not that Dutch agriculture was affected by critical phenomena such as a decrease in sales and production, but the fact that the crisis appeared relatively late in Dutch agriculture.

In Europe as a whole, the exceptional reduction in population and the related fall in demand for grain since the beginning of the seventeenth century had caused the price of agricultural products to fall.

Dutch peasants were able to remain unaffected by this crisis for a long time because they had specialized in dairy farming, industrial crops, and horticulture.

However, toward the end of the seventeenth century, they too were overtaken by the general agricultural crisis.

