American Railroads

In the United States, railroads spearheaded the second phase of the transportation revolution by surpassing the previous importance of canals.

The mid-1800s witnessed a significant expansion of American railroads.

The major cities east of the Mississippi River were connected by a spiderweb of railroad tracks.

The growth of Chicago exemplifies the impact of these rail links.

In 1849, Chicago was a village of a few hundred people with virtually no rail service.

By 1860, it had transformed into a city of 100,000, served by eleven railroads.

Farmers to the north and west of Chicago no longer had to transport their grain, livestock, and dairy products down the Mississippi River to New Orleans;

they could now ship their products directly east.

Chicago replaced New Orleans as the primary commercial hub of the interior of America.

The east-west rail lines stimulated the settlement and agricultural development of the Midwest.

By 1860, Illinois, Indiana, and Wisconsin had supplanted Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New York as the leading wheat-growing states.

By enabling farmers to expedite the transportation of their products to the East, railroads increased the value of farmland and promoted additional settlement.

Consequently, population growth in agricultural areas triggered industrial development in cities such as Chicago, Davenport (Iowa), and Minneapolis, as the new settlers required lumber for fences and houses, as well as mills to grind wheat into flour.

Railroads also facilitated the growth of small towns along their routes.

The Illinois Central Railroad, which possessed more track than any other railroad in 1855, profited not only from its traffic but also from real estate speculation.

By acquiring land for stations along its path, the Illinois Central then established towns around these stations.

For instance, the selection of Manteno, Illinois, as a stop on the Illinois Central transformed the site from a crossroads without a single house in 1854 into a bustling town of nearly a thousand in 1860, complete with hotels, lumberyards, grain elevators, and gristmills.

By the time of the Civil War (1861-1865), few regarded the railroad-linked Midwest as a frontier region or considered its inhabitants as pioneers.

As the nation's first major business, the railroads revolutionized the conduct of business.

During the early 1830s, railroads, like canals, relied on financial assistance from state governments.

However, with the onset of economic depression in the late 1830s, state governments abandoned excessively ambitious railroad projects.

Convinced that railroads burdened them with high taxes and dashed their hopes, voters turned against state aid, and in the early 1840s, several states amended their constitutions to prohibit state funding for railroads and canals.

The federal government partially filled the void, but federal aid did not significantly stimulate railroads before 1860.

Instead, the burden of financing shifted to city and county governments in agricultural areas that sought to attract railroads.

Municipal governments often granted railroads rights-of-way, land grants for stations, and public funds.

However, the remarkable expansion of the railroad network in the 1850s strained the financial capacity of local governments and necessitated a shift towards private investment, which had always been present.

Individuals living near railroads, well aware of the economic benefits they brought, had long purchased railroad stock issued by governments and had directly invested in railroads, sometimes by contributing their labor to their construction.

But the large railroads of the 1850s required more capital than these small investors could generate.

Gradually, the center of railroad financing shifted to New York City, and in fact, it was the railroad boom of the 1850s that helped establish Wall Street in New York City as the nation's premier capital market.

The stocks of all the leading railroads were traded on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange during the 1850s.

Additionally, the growth of railroads transformed New York City into the hub of modern investment firms.

These investment firms evaluated the stock of railroads in smaller American cities and then found buyers for these stocks in New York City, Philadelphia, Paris, London, Amsterdam, and Hamburg.

By controlling the flow of funds to railroads, the investment bankers began to exert influence over the railroads' internal affairs by overseeing administrative reorganizations in times of trouble.

