Animal Signals in the Rainforest

The quality of daytime light in forests varies with vegetation density, the angle of the sun, and cloud cover.

Animals and plants appear differently under different lighting conditions.

A color or pattern that is hard to see in one type of light may be very noticeable in another.

In the ever-changing light environment of the forest, animals must be able to communicate visually with members of their own species while avoiding detection by predators.

Animals can hide from predators by choosing the light environment where their patterns are least visible.

This may involve moving to different parts of the forest at different times of the day or under different weather conditions, or it may involve changing color to match the changing light conditions.

Many species of amphibians (frogs and toads) and reptiles (lizards and snakes) can change their color patterns to blend in with their surroundings.

Some also use color changes as signals.

The chameleon lizard is particularly adept at this.

Some chameleon species can change from a dull appearance to vibrant colors in seconds.

They use these color changes to signal their level of aggression or readiness to mate.

Other species take advantage of favorable lighting conditions to perform visual displays.

Male birds of paradise, for example, display their spectacular plumage in well-lit areas to attract females.

Certain butterflies move into patches of sunlight that reach the forest floor and open and close their beautifully patterned wings in the bright spots.

They also compete for the best spots of sunlight.

In a rainforest, very little light filters through the canopy to the ground, and the predominant wavelengths are yellow-to-green.

A signal is most easily seen if it is bright.

In the green-to-yellow lighting conditions of the lower levels of the forest, yellow and green would be the brightest colors.

However, if an animal is sitting in an area with a yellowish or greenish background, these colors would not be very visible as signals.

The best signal depends not only on its brightness but also on how well it contrasts with the background.

In this part of the rainforest, red and orange are the best colors for signaling.

The ground-walking Australian brush turkey, which lives in the rainforests and scrublands of the east coast of Australia, has a brown-to-black plumage with bare, bright-red skin on the head and neck, and an orange-yellow neck collar.

During courtship and aggressive displays, the turkey inflates sacs in the neck region, enlarging its colored neck collar, and flings about a pendulous part of the signaling apparatus while making calls to attract or repel.

This impressive display is clearly visible in the light that illuminates the forest floor.

Less colorful birds and animals in the rainforest rely on non-visual forms of signaling, especially over long distances.

The piercing cries of the rhinoceros hornbill and the distinctive calls of gibbons characterize the Southeast Asian rainforest.

In densely wooded environments, sound is the most effective means of communication over long distances because it travels with little obstruction from trees and vegetation.

Visual signals can only be seen at short distances in forests, where they are not blocked by trees.

The male riflebird utilizes both sound and visual signals in its courtship display.

The sounds produced as its wings open carry well over long distances, advertising its presence widely.

The ritualized visual display communicates in close quarters when a female approaches.

